---
layout: post
title:  "An Introduction to Abstract Algebra (Part 17)"
date:   2016-05-25
categories: Abstract Algebra
---

Welcome to the 17th post on my abstract algebra series. Today I'll give a more in depth overview of ideals.

Proposition: let R be a ring and $$(I_j), j \in J$$ be a collection of ideals of R. Then $$\bigcap_{i \in J}I_j \subseteq R$$ is an ideal.

Proof: $$\bigcap_{j \in J}I_j$$ is an additive subgroup (by an earlier proposition about the intersection of subgroups being a subgroup). Let $$x \in \bigcap_{j \in J}I_j$$ then for all $$j, x \in I_j$$ so $$yx \in I_j$$ and $$xy \in \bigcap_{j \in J}I_j$$. Similarly $$xy \in I_j$$ so $$yx \in \bigcap_{j \in J}I_j$$.

Let R be a ring, $$I \subseteq I$$ an ideal and $$A \subseteq R$$ a subset. We define $$(A) = \bigcap_{A \subseteq I \subseteq R} I$$. (A) is the smallest ideal that contains A and we call it the ideal generated by A.

Proposition: let R be a unitary ring, $$A \subseteq R$$, we define $$RAR = \{ \sum_{i=0}^n r_ia_is_i : r_i,s_i \in R, a_i \in A\}$$. Then (A) = RAR.

Proof: RAR is an ideal: $$\sum_{i=0}^n r_ia_is_i + \sum_{j=0}^m u_jb_jv_j = \sum_{k=0}^{n+m}x_kc_ky_k$$ where $$x_k = r_k, x_k = a_k, y_k = s_k; 0 \leq k < n$$ and $$x_k = u_{k-n}, c_k = b_{k-n}, y_k = v_{k-n}; n \leq k < m$$. Let $$u \in R$$, then $$u(\sum_{i=0}^n r_ia_is_i) = \sum_{i=0}^n (u+i)a_is_i \in RAR$$ hence $$A \subseteq RAR$$ (becase $$a = 1 \cdot a \cdot 1$$). Conversely if $$s_i, r_i \in R, a_i \in A$$, $$r_ia_is_i \in (A)$$ and $$\sum_{i=0}^n a_ir_is_i \in (A)$$ hence $$RAR \subseteq (A)$$ so $$(A) = RAR$$.

 Remarks: if R is commutative then (A) = RA = AR = RAR. If $$A = \{a\}$$ and R is commutative then (A) = (a) = Ra = $$\{ra : r\in R\}$$. If R is not commutative then this might not be true as $$\{ras: r, s \in R\}$$ might not be an ideal.

 Notation: if $$A = \{a_1,...,a_n\}$$ is finite we usually write $$(A) = (a_1,..,a_n)$$ instead of $$(\{a_1,..,a_n\})$$.

 An ideal generated by a finite set is called a finitely generated ideal. An ideal generated by 1 element is called a principal ideal. Examples: $$\{0\} = (0)$$ is a principal ideal. If R is unitary, $$R = (1)$$ is also principal. In $$\mathbb{Z}$$ every ideal is of the form $$n\mathbb{Z}$$ and principal.

Proposition: Let R be a unitary ring
1) if $$I \subseteq R$$ is an ideal, then I = R if and only if I contains a unit.
2) if R is commutative and $$1 \neq 0$$, R is a field if and only if every ieal in R is either $$\{0\}$$ or R.

Proof: 1) If I = R then $$1 \in I$$ so it has a unit. If $$u \in R^*$$ and $$u \in I$$ then $$u^{-1} \cdot u \in I$$ so $$1 \in I$$. Then for all $$r \in R, r\cdot 1 = r \in I$$ so R = I.
2) If R is a field and $$I \subseteq R$$ is an ideal, if $$I = \{0\}$$ then $$I \cap R^* = T \cap R \backslash \{0\}$$ is nonempty. Conversely assume every ideal is $$\{0\}$$ or R. Then for all $$u \in R \backslash \{0\}, (u) = R$$. Since $$1 \in R$$ this means there exists a v such that uv = 1 so $$u \in R^*$$, hence R is a field.

Corollary: let F be a field, R a ring and $$f : F \rightarrow R$$ a ring homomorphism. Then either $$f(F) = \{0\}$$ or f is injective.

Proof: ker(F) is an ideal of F so either ker(f) = F in which case f is trivial, or ker(f) = $$\{0\}$$ and f is injective. In particular if R is unitary and f is unitary then f is injective, because the kernel must be trivial.

Let R be a ring, $$I \subset R$$ a proper ideal. I is said to be maximal if the only ideals containing I are I and R.

Proposition: let R and S be rings, and $$f: R \rightarrow S$$ a ring homomorphism
1) if $$I \subseteq S$$ is an ideal then $$f^{-1}(I)$$ is an ideal
2) if f is surjective and I is an ideal in R then f(I) is an ideal.

Proof: 1) $$f^{-1}(I)$$ is an additive subgroup (because the inverse image of a group is a group by an earlier theorem). Let $$x \in f^{-1}(I)$$ and $$y \in R$$, then $$f(xy) = f(x)f(y) \in I$$ so $$xy \in f^{-1}(I)$$. Similarly $$f(yx) = f(y)f(x) \in I$$ so $$yx \in f^{-1}(I)$$.
2) f(I) is an additive subgroup. Let $$x \in f(I)$$ and $$u \in S = f(R)$$ (since S is surjective). Then $$x = f(s)$$ so $$s \in I$$ and $$y = f(r)$$ where $$r \in R$$. Then $$xy = f(s)f(r) = f(sr) \in f(I)$$ since $$s \in I$$ and $$yx = f(r)f(s) = f(rs) \in f(I)$$.

Proposition: Let R be a unitary commutative ring where $$1 \neq 0$$, then $$I \subset R$$ is maximal if and only if R/I is a field.

Proof: if I is maximal: let $$J \subseteq R/I$$ be an ideal, $$\pi : R \rightarrow R/I$$ be a ring homomorphism. Then $$\pi^{-1}(J) \subseteq R$$ is an ideal. Therefore $$\pi^{-1}(J) = $$ either R or J. If $$\pi^{-1}(J) = R$$ then $$R/I = J$$. If $$\pi^{-1}(J) = I$$ then $$J = \{0\}$$ so R/I is a field. Conversely if R/I is a field and $$I \subseteq J \subseteq R$$ where J is an ideal, $$\pi(J)$$ is either $$\{0\}$$ or R/I. If $$\pi(J) = \{0\}$$ then $$J \subseteq I$$ so J = I. If $$\pi(J) = R/I$$ then J = R. For all $$a \in R, (a+I) \cap J$$ is nonempty, so $$a+I = c+I \in J$$. Since $$a \in J, J = R$$ so I is maximal.

Examples: in a field the only maximal ideal is $$\{0\}$$. In $$\mathbb{Z}, n\mathbb{Z}$$ is maximal if and only if $$\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$$ is a field, which is the case only when n is prime. In $$F[x], (x)$$ is a maximal ideal.

Krull's theorem: Let R be a unitary ring, then every proper ideal is contained in a maximal ideal

Let R be a commutative unitary ring, $$I \subset R$$ a proper ideal, I is prime if for all $$x, y \in R$$ if $$xy \in I$$ then $$x \in I$$ or $$y \in I$$. In $$\mathbb{Z}, n\mathbb{Z}$$ is prime if and only if for all x, y if $$n \vert xy$$ then $$n \vert x$$ or $$n \vert y$$ if and only if n is prime if and only if $$n\mathbb{Z}$$ is maximal.

Proposition: Let R be a commutative unitary ring where $$1 \neq 0$$ and $$I \subset R$$ is an ideal. I is prime if and only if R/I is an integral domain.

Proof: I is proper and prime so $$1+I \neq 0+I$$. Let x+I be a zero divisor in R/I, then there exists a $$y \in R\backslash I$$ such that $$(y+I)(x+I) = yx+I$$ then $$yx \in I$$ so $$x \in I$$ hence $$x+I=I$$ (x is the zero coset) which means R/I is an integral domain. Assume R/I is an integral domain. Then $$1+I \neq 0+I$$ so I is proper. Let $$xy \in I$$, then $$(xy+I) = (x+I)(y+I) = I$$. Since I is integral either $$x+I = I$$ which means $$x \in I$$ or $$y+I = I$$ so $$y \in I$$.

Corollary: let R be a commutative unitary ring where $$1 \neq 0$$, if $$I \subseteq R$$ is maximal then I is prime.

Proof: given tht I is maximal, R/I is a field, so R/I is an integral domain ad therefore I is prime.

Stay tuned for a post on the Chinese Reminder Theorem next!
